# Freshwater Baits

## Pellet

### Powerbait

[Powerbait](https://www.amazon.com/Berkley-Powerbait-Glitter-Rainblow-1-75-Ounce/dp/B0000AV1L0)
is mush that you put on your hook and hope the fish swallows whole. You don't
want to make balls of powerbait too large because fish might nibble at it and
never get hooked. Also most trout mouths aren't actually that big. Only
farm-raised fish will eat powerbait, because other fish aren't accustomed to
eating pellets. I honestly didn't have much success with powerbait but have seen
testimonials and pictures from others who've caught pretty large fish using it.
I have some so I'll keep trying, but at this point I favor live bait much more.

## Live Bugs

### Nightcrawlers (Earthworms)

The first thing I learned about earthworms is that many fishermen call them
"nightcrawlers." There are multiple sizes of earthworms, and places that sell
them will usually offer a few varieties. Worms are pretty gross, according to
everyone. But fish really like them! We had bluegills come with a lot of
interest in our worms! But most of them made away with the bait to date; I still
have to get better at hooking them.

A worm that is hooked is called an _angleworm_.

#### How to correctly hook nightcrawlers

So the advice I heard from a friendly man at the reservoir was that you want to
hook through the _collar_ of the worm (the thickest part), then hook a piece of
the end. I was also told to cut / pinch off part of the worm so fish have to
bite near the hook. Also smaller fish can't fit a whole worm in their mouth, so
your options are to use smaller worms or again reduce the size of your worm by
cutting. I always bring a pair of scissors to fishing, but I also squeezed off
one end of a worm before. It's pretty gross.

### Red Worms

Apparently there is another kind of worm called a red worm -- little fish that
stay in shallower water / near the surface (a la
[Bluegill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluegill),
[Crappies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crappie) and other
[Sunfish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centrarchidae)) are more likely to eat
these worms because they're smaller and wiggle _less_. But if there's one thing
you should know about any live bait, it's that the wiggling attracts fish. So
make sure you get worms that are actually alive and wiggly.

### Mealworms

I used to feed [mealworms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealworm) to my pet
lizards when I was in middle school. They're really gross looking but apparently
safe for humans to eat, capable of breaking down styrofoam polystyrene back into
organic material, and they make great bait for smaller fish.

## Live Baitfish

### Killies

Also known as [Killifish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Killifish) I used to get a bucket of these and a [portable water aerator](https://www.amazon.com/Marine-Metal-Bubble-Portable-Pump/dp/B000EYULIS) to keep them alive. We were mostly catching freshwater bass and catfish with these; I got a 16" catfish at Holmdel Park in NJ! From what I understand they're mostly an east-coast thing though. I've yet to discover what live freshwater baitfish are used around here in California.

### Shad

Many northern California lakes have little shad. As a result you might find some success using them as live bait, but
many lakes are regulated to prevent invasive species.
